 “It would be no exaggeration,” declared The New York Times, to say that the finish of the marathon at the 1908 Olympics in London was “the most thrilling athletic event that has occurred since that Marathon race in ancient Greece, where the victor fell at the goal and, with a wave of triumph, died.”Dorando Pietri’s run to the finish line was indeed dramatic. He staggered into the Olympic stadium at Shepherd’s Bush before an enthusiastic crowd of 100,000, then tottered and fell, rose up, fell again, and was swarmed by doctors and officials who, giving way to the pleadings of the by-then overwrought crowd, seized the unconscious Pietri and dragged him across the finish line to tremendous applause. The effort marked the beginnings of a surge in the popularity of marathon racing despite the fact that the courageous Italian did not win.Pietri, a confectioner from Capri, Italy, was disqualified because of the assistance he received, but he won the sympathies of the British for his heroic ordeal. English author Sir Arthur Conan Doyle described Pietri’s finish: “It is horrible, yet fascinating, this struggle between a set purpose and an utterly exhausted frame.” Pietri’s time for the distance was 2 hours 54 minutes 46 seconds. Rushed immediately to the hospital, he hovered near death for two and a half hours following the race. When he recovered later, Queen Alexandra bestowed on him an enormous gold cup, reflecting the sentiments of the spectators.Pietri and the winner, John Joseph Hayes of the United States, had both been long shots. The favourite, Charles Hefferon of South Africa, led until the final six miles. Pietri’s handler reportedly then gave the Italian an invigorating shot of strychnine. With less than 2 miles (3 km) to the stadium, Pietri sprinted past Hefferon, who was tiring in the July heat and humidity. Nearing the stadium, Hayes also overtook Hefferon. Pietri entered the stadium clearly disoriented, turning left instead of right. After the Italian’s collapse, Hayes trotted across the finish line 32 seconds later. The race inspired American songwriter Irving Berlin to compose his first hit, “Dorando.”No one is quite certain why the Estonian Greco-Roman wrestler Martin Klein, who had competed in several international events under his nation’s flag, chose to appear at the 1912 Olympic Games wearing the uniform of tsarist Russia. It was a choice that may have stirred the spirit of his formidable semifinal opponent, the Finn Alfred Asikainen. Like many of his countrymen, Asikainen felt no love for Russia, which had controlled Finland since 1809. The International Olympic Committee evidently sympathized with the Finns, allowing Finnish athletes to compete in neighboring Sweden under their own flag—a decision the Russians hotly contested.Klein’s semifinal match with Asikainen was hotly contested as well. Under a blazing summer sun, the two middleweights grappled for long minutes, each seeking to throw the other off balance. As the minutes stretched into an hour, the referees allowed Klein and Asikainen to take a short rest break. The event continued for another half hour, when the referees ordered another rest break. On it went until, after 11 gruelling hours, Klein finally pinned Asikainen to the mat.Despite his defeat, Finnish nationalists and the international press alike hailed Asikainen as a hero, a symbol of their small country’s capacity to resist their much larger neighbor; Klein, for his part, was all but ignored. His victory, won after what remains the longest wrestling match in Olympic history, was Pyrrhic. Still exhausted after his ordeal, Klein refused to compete against Claes Johansson, the Swedish favorite, the next day. Johansson took the gold medal in the event by default, with Klein being awarded the silver and Asikainen the bronze.The stories of British runners Eric Liddell and Harold Abrahams are known to many through the 1981 Academy Award-winning film Chariots of Fire. As the movie tells it, Liddell was boarding a boat to the 1924 Paris Olympics when he discovered that the qualifying heats for his event, the 100-metre sprint, were scheduled for a Sunday. A devout Christian, he refused to run on the Sabbath and was at the last minute switched to the 400 metres.In truth, Liddell had known the schedule for months and had decided not to compete in the 100 metres, the 4 × 100-metre relay, or the 4 × 400-metre relay because they all required running on a Sunday. The press roundly criticized the Scotsman and called his decision unpatriotic, but Liddell devoted his training to the 200 metres and the 400 metres, races that would not require him to break the Sabbath. He won a bronze medal in the 200 and won the 400 in a world-record time. Liddell ignored the media’s subsequent hero worship and soon returned to China, where he had been born, to continue his family’s missionary work. He died there in 1945 in a Japanese internment camp.Abrahams’s religion is also a strong force in the film, which links the discrimination he faced as a Jew with his motivation to win Olympic gold in Paris. Abrahams, however, was hardly an outsider. A University of Cambridge undergraduate, he had already represented Britain at the 1920 Olympics in Antwerp, Belgium. His drive to win in Paris was fueled more by his desire to redeem his loss in Antwerp and by his rivalry with his two older brothers (one of whom had competed at the 1912 Stockholm Games) than by his status as a Jew. To achieve his goal, Abrahams hired a personal coach, the renowned Sam Mussabini, and trained with single-minded energy. He even lobbied anonymously to have himself dropped from the long-jump event (in which he had previously set a British record) so that he could concentrate on his running. The movie also errs in showing Abrahams failing in the 200 metres before eventually triumphing in the 100 metres. He actually won the 100 first; the 200-metre final was held two days later.Abrahams suffered an injury in 1925 that ended his athletic career. He later became an attorney, radio broadcaster, and sports administrator, serving as chairman of the British Amateur Athletics Board from 1968 to 1975. He wrote widely about athletics and was the author of a number of books, including The Olympic Games, 1896–1952. He also contributed the classic article “Olympic Games” to the 15th edition of Encyclopædia Britannica.Babe Didrikson Zaharias was one of the most accomplished female athletes of the 20th century and the star of the 1932 Olympic Games. Born Mildred Didriksen in Port Arthur, Texas, she excelled at every sport she played, from basketball and baseball to swimming and skating.In July 1932, at age 18, Didrikson arrived at the Amateur Athletic Union championships in Evanston, Illinois, as the sole member of the Employers Casualty Company of Dallas (Texas) team. There she participated in 8 of the 10 sporting events, winning 5—all in one afternoon. She not only won the shot put, long jump, and baseball throw but also broke world records in the 80-metre hurdles and the javelin and tied Jean Shiley with a world record in the high jump. Perhaps most remarkable, she also won the team trophy.A few weeks later Didrikson was on her way to the Olympic Games in Los Angeles with her mind set on winning as many medals as possible. On the train to California she delighted journalists and annoyed teammates with countless tales of her athletic achievements. Although she would have probably chosen to compete in five or more events, Olympic rules forced her to choose only three.Didrikson began by winning the javelin event with a world record throw of 143 feet 4 inches (43.68 metres). She then set another world record while winning the 80-metre hurdles in 11.7 seconds. The high jump, her last event, found her in a tie with teammate Shiley. Both women had cleared 5 feet 51/4 inches (1.657 metres), a world record, and had failed at 5 feet 6 inches. Judges called for a jump off at 5 feet 53/4 inches. When both women cleared the height, the judges scrambled for a way to fairly declare a winner. Their solution hardly seemed fair. While both women were credited with the world record, Shiley was awarded the gold medal and Didrikson the silver on the basis that Didrikson’s western-roll style of jumping (diving over the bar) was illegal.After the Games Didrikson took up golf and became the dominant women’s golfer of her era. In 1938 she married wrestler George Zaharias, and in 1950 the Associated Press named her the greatest female athlete of the half-century.The performance of Jesse Owens at the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin is well known and rightfully acclaimed. He not only dominated the sprint competition, garnering three gold medals (he won a fourth in the long jump) and earning the title of “fastest man in the world,” but he also was credited with punching a hole in Nazi theories of racial superiority. Yet Owens’s experience in Berlin was quite different from the stories reported in many papers.One popular tale that arose from Owens’s victories was that of the “snub.” On the first day of competition, Adolf Hitler publicly congratulated a few German and Finnish winners. He left the stadium, however, after the German competitors were eliminated from the day’s final event. The International Olympic Committee president, Henri de Baillet-Latour, angry at Hitler’s actions, told him to congratulate all or none of the victors. Hitler chose to no longer publicly congratulate anyone (though he did have private meetings with German medalists). On the second day of competition, Owens won the gold medal in the 100 metres but did not receive a handshake from Hitler. American papers, unaware of Hitler’s deal with the IOC, printed the story that Hitler had “snubbed” Owens, who was African American. Over the following years the myth of Hitler’s snub grew and grew.Despite the politically charged atmosphere of the Games, Owens was adored by the German public, who screamed his name and hounded him for photos and autographs. The friendship that many Germans felt for him was most evident during the long jump. Accustomed to U.S. competitions that allowed practice jumps, he took a preliminary jump and was astonished when the officials counted it as his first attempt. Unsettled, he foot-faulted the second attempt. Before his last jump, German competitor Carl Ludwig (“Luz”) Long approached Owens. Popular accounts suggest that Long told Owens to place a towel several inches in front of the takeoff board. With Owens’s jumping ability, Long felt this maneuver would allow him to safely qualify for the finals. Owens used the towel, qualified, and eventually sailed 26 feet 81/4 inches (8.134 metres) to beat Long for the gold. The two men became close friends.Owens’s last gold medal came in the 400-metre relay, an event he had never expected to run. The U.S. coaches replaced Jewish team members Sam Stoller and Marty Glickman with Owens and Ralph Metcalfe, spurring rumors of anti-Semitism. Despite the controversy, the team set the Olympic record with a time of 39.8 seconds.Officially known at the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin as Son Kitei, marathon runner Sohn Kee-chung symbolized the fierce nationalistic tensions of the era. A native Korean, Sohn lived under the rule of Japan, which had annexed Korea in 1910. From an early age Sohn had chafed under Japanese domination. Though he was forced to represent Japan and take a Japanese name in order to compete in the Olympics, he signed the Olympic roster with his Korean name and drew a small Korean flag next to it.With the Japanese symbol of the rising sun on his uniform, Sohn joined 55 other entrants in the marathon. The early leader was Argentine Juan Carlos Zabala, the favourite and defending champion from the 1932 Games. Zabala emerged far in front of the pack, but his strategy backfired as the race wore on. Sohn, who was running with Great Britain’s Ernest Harper, gradually gained on Zabala and eventually passed him. As the champion of the first modern Olympic marathon in 1896, Spyridon Louis, looked on, Sohn crossed the finish line in a record 2 hours 29 minutes 19.2 seconds. His Korean teammate Nam Sung-yong, competing under the Japanese name of Nan Shoryu, finished third.On the medal stand the two Koreans bowed their heads during the playing of the Japanese national anthem. Afterward Sohn explained to reporters that their bowed heads were an act of defiance and an expression of the runners’ anger over Japanese control of Korea. The reporters, however, were much more interested in the race. Describing the physical pain he endured and his strategy in the race’s late stages, Sohn said, “The human body can do so much. Then the heart and spirit must take over.”Back in Korea Sohn was a hero. He continued to represent Korean athletics, and in 1948 he carried the South Korean flag in the opening ceremonies of the London Olympics, the first Olympiad attended by an independent Korea. At the 1988 Games in Seoul, South Korea, Sohn proudly carried the Olympic flame to the stadium.Fanny Blankers-Koen of The Netherlands was a 30-year-old mother of two by the time the 1948 Olympic Games in London began. Although she had been a participant in the 1936 Games in Berlin, World War II created a 12-year break in her Olympic appearances.Blankers-Koen, however, had not been idle. Going into the Games, she held six track-and-field world records—in the 100 yards, 80-metre hurdles, the high jump, the long jump, and two relays. Despite her list of accomplishments, Blankers-Koen had her detractors. Some thought she was too old to be an Olympic sprint champion, and others denounced her for not attending to her duties as a wife and mother. At the Games she quickly set her critics straight by recording a three-yard victory in the 100 metres with a time of 11.9 seconds.Her victory in the 80-metre hurdles was much closer. Great Britain’s Maureen Gardner, a 19-year-old, took an early lead in the race. At the fifth hurdle, Blankers-Koen caught Gardner but also hit the barrier, which threw her off balance and caused her to lurch over the finish line. The race was so close the top three finishers had to wait for the results to be posted to see who had won: Blankers-Koen, with an Olympic-record time of 11.2 seconds.Despite winning gold in her first two events, an emotionally spent Blankers-Koen was not confident going into the 200-metre dash. Feeling both pressured to win and reviled for even participating, she burst into tears and told her husband and coach Jan Blankers that she wanted to withdraw. She reconsidered, however, and went on to win the final by seven yards, despite muddy conditions. It was the largest margin of victory in that event in Olympic history. In her last event, the 4 × 100-metre relay, Blankers-Koen sparked her team to victory. In fourth place when she received the baton, Blankers-Koen put on a show, chasing down the field and catching the lead runner at the finish line.Nicknamed “The Flying Housewife” by the press, Blankers-Koen received a hero’s welcome when she returned to The Netherlands with her four gold medals. Appreciative fans cheered wildly as she rode through the streets of Amsterdam in a horse-drawn carriage.Károly Takács of Hungary overcame great adversity to win back-to-back Olympic titles in rapid-fire pistol shooting. The European champion and a member of the Hungarian world-championship team in 1938, Takács was ready to make his mark in the 1940 Olympics, which his team was expected to dominate. War and a tragic accident in 1938, however, put Takács’s Olympic dreams on hold.At age 28, Takács, a sergeant in the Hungarian army, was severely injured while practicing maneuvers with his squad—a grenade with a defective pin blew up before Takács could throw it. His right hand, which was his shooting hand, was horribly maimed, and he spent a month in the hospital. Determined not to let his injury change him, Takács taught himself to shoot left-handed. By 1939 he was back in top form. He won the Hungarian pistol-shooting championship and was allowed to stay in the army due to his shooting fame. Takács was promoted to captain, but his Olympic hopes faded as World War II raged on and caused the cancellation of the 1940 and 1944 Olympic Games.After the war Takács returned to competition as a left-handed shooter and earned a spot on his country’s team at the 1948 Olympic Games in London. He was 38 years old when he finally had his shot at Olympic glory. Argentina’s Carlos Valiente, the 1947 world champion, was the favorite to win the title—but it was Takács who was golden. He scored a world-record 580 points to become the Olympic champion, while Valiente compiled 571 points in his second-place effort. Four years later, Takács again rose to the top when he won his second Olympic gold medal at the 1952 Games in Helsinki, Finland. This time Takács notched 579 points, slipping by silver medalist Szilárd Kun, who recorded 578. At age 46, Takács made one more Olympic appearance in the 1956 Games in Melbourne, Australia, where he finished eighth.Emil Zátopek, known as the “bouncing Czech,” didn’t look like the picture of Olympic grace. Although he set a new standard for distance running, his contorted running methods and facial grimaces made observers believe he was about to collapse. Instead, he used his unorthodox style to build a stellar career.Zátopek had won gold in the 10,000 metres and silver in the 5,000 metres at the 1948 Olympic Games in London, and he arrived at the 1952 Games in Helsinki, Finland, poised to take the gold medal in both. He nearly didn’t compete, however. Six weeks before the Games, he collapsed with a virus, and doctors recommended three months rest to stave off heart damage. Zátopek took little notice, fashioning his own remedy with a diet of tea and lemons.Zátopek defended his 10,000-metre title with ease; his even pace annihilated the field, and he shattered the Olympic record. In the 5,000 metres he faced very real opposition in Germany’s Herbert Schade, France’s Alain Mimoun, and Great Britain’s Christopher Chataway, but his epic final sprint secured the victory and another Olympic record. To add to the Zátopek family glory, a few yards away, his wife, Dana, won a gold medal for the javelin that day.Despite these triumphs, Zátopek was not satisfied. He entered the marathon, a distance he had never competed in before. Feeling his way, he stayed close to Jim Peters of Great Britain, the favorite. Believing Peters’s remark during the race that the pace was too slow, Zátopek accelerated and left Peters far behind. He won before anyone else had even entered the stadium; his only accompaniment was the Olympic record. Zátopek’s three gold medals at Helsinki remain a benchmark in Olympic distance-running history.Zátopek’s success was based upon groundbreaking fitness routines. His tough, military-style training became the stuff of legends—sometimes he would run 50 intervals of 200 metres with just a 200-metre recovery jog in between. His preparation helped him develop a mental as well as physical dominance over his opponents.A hernia slowed Zátopek’s training for the 1956 Games in Melbourne, Australia, and he finished in sixth place in the marathon, his only event. A virtuous and popular national hero who was also beloved by his competitors, Zátopek retired in 1958 with 18 world records and four gold medals.Prior to the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City, Věra Čáslavská of Czechoslovakia had already established a reputation as one of the most graceful and accomplished gymnasts the world has ever known. At the 1964 Tokyo Games she swept up three gold medals, including the all-around title, and at the 1965 and 1967 gymnastics European championships she won every event.Čáslavská will be best remembered, however, for her performance in Mexico City and the courage she showed in the months leading up to the Games. In June 1968 she signed the “Two Thousand Words,” a document that called for more rapid progress toward real democracy in Czechoslovakia. After Soviet tanks entered Prague in August of that year, Čáslavská, facing possible arrest for her political stance, fled to the mountain village of Šumperk. There she had only the open fields and dense forests in which to train. She was granted permission to rejoin the Olympic team only a few weeks before the Games. Her patriotic devotion won the admiration of her fellow Czechoslovakians but also ensured that these Games would be the last time she would ever compete in gymnastics.Čáslavská dominated the gymnastics competition in Mexico City, winning gold medals in the individual all-around, the vault, the uneven bars, and floor exercises and silver medals in the balance beam and team competition. The crowd went wild when she performed her floor exercises to the tune of “The Mexican Hat Dance.” There were rumors of suspicious judging when Soviet gymnast Larissa Petrik tied with Čáslavská for first place in that competition, and during the medal ceremony Čáslavská reportedly lowered her head and turned away when the Soviet anthem was played.The day after winning her last gold medal, Čáslavská capped her glorious Olympic career by marrying Josef Odložil, a Czechoslovakian middle-distance runner who had won a silver medal in the 1,500-metre race at the 1964 Olympics (he also competed in the 1968 Olympics).Upon her return to Prague, Čáslavská was refused employment, and her autobiography was deemed unprintable by the authorities (a heavily edited version was later published in Japan). She was eventually allowed to coach the national gymnastics team. After the collapse of communist rule in 1989, Čáslavská became president of the Czechoslovakian Olympic Committee. She was named president of the Czech Olympic Committee in 1993 and became a member of the IOC in 1995.Kipchoge (Kip) Keino’s superhuman efforts and determination at the 1968 Olympic Games in Mexico City were far more inspiring than the gold and silver medals he won. Keino, now one of Kenya’s most beloved national heroes, was suffering from severe abdominal pains (later attributed to gallbladder problems) when he arrived in Mexico City. Doctors warned him of the dangers of running with his condition, but Keino was not to be deterred. He competed in six distance races in eight days, tough for any healthy athlete let alone one suffering from stomach ailments.Keino, a goatherd and policeman, had been running competitively since age 13 without any substantial support or formal training. Yet he loved to run, and he was able to establish himself as one of the medal favorites heading into Mexico City. In his first final—the 10,000 metres—the Kenyan’s stomach pains became unbearable, and he collapsed on the infield with just two laps to go. In the 5,000-metre final, Keino earned a silver medal, finishing just 0.2 second behind Tunisian Mohammed Gammoudi.On the day of the 1,500-metre race, the doctors had ordered Keino not to run. At first he agreed to stay in the Olympic Village but changed his mind as the start time grew near. Adding to his troubles, Keino became stuck in a traffic jam and had to jog the last mile to the track. In the 1,500 Keino faced race favorite Jim Ryun of the United States. Despite his stomach pains, Keino set a furious pace over the last laps of the race, negating Ryun’s powerful finishing kick. Keino won the race by 20 metres.On that same day, back in Kenya, Keino’s wife gave birth to their third daughter, Milka Olympia Chelagat, named in tribute to her father’s wondrous Olympic performance. Over the years, Keino and his wife have taken in more than 100 children, and they have seven of their own. Many Kenyans have named their offspring after this beloved hero and father of so many orphaned children. Keino is currently president of the Kenyan national Olympic committee.For someone who needed a teammate’s misfortune to even make the team in 1972, tiny Soviet gymnast Olga Korbut had little trouble snagging the sport’s spotlight and endearing herself to millions.Korbut, 4 feet 11 inches (1.5 metres) tall and 85 pounds (38 kilograms), qualified as an alternate, but the need to replace an injured teammate catapulted her into competition during the Olympic Games in Munich, West Germany. She emerged as a star during the team events, becoming the first person ever to complete a backward somersault on the uneven parallel bars. Her captivating smile and adorable personality shattered the stereotype of the stone-faced, performance-driven Soviet athlete, making Korbut an instant fan favorite.After helping the Soviet Union win the gold medal in the team competition, Korbut was favored to upset teammate Lyudmila Turishcheva in the all-around individual competition. But disaster struck on the uneven bars. She scuffed her feet on the mat as she mounted, slipped off the bars attempting another move, and botched her remount. Her score was a mere 7.5, effectively eliminating her from the race for the all-around gold. What followed was a scene that was constantly replayed on television for days to come—Korbut weeping uncontrollably as she sat hunched over on the Soviet team’s bench.The next day, in the individual apparatus competition, Korbut would avenge her struggles, winning gold medals for her performance on the balance beam and in the floor exercise, while taking a silver medal for the uneven parallel bars. Korbut’s magical smile returned, and her emotional roller coaster of success, failure, and success epitomized the drama of the Games.Surprisingly, Korbut became an idol in the United States and was invited to the White House in 1973. There, she recounts, Pres. Richard Nixon told her that she “did more for reducing the political tension during the Cold War between our two countries than the embassies were able to do in five years.” Korbut won a team gold medal again at the 1976 Olympics in Montreal, while picking up a silver medal for the balance beam. She retired in 1977.Fujimoto Shun’s efforts during the 1976 Olympic Games in Montreal represent one of the most courageous and self-sacrificing performances in Olympic history.Fujimoto and the other members of the Japanese men’s gymnastics team were defending four consecutive Olympic titles, and they faced stiff competition from the Soviet Union. The Soviet team led by a half-point at the end of compulsories when the Japanese team received a devastating setback. While finishing a tumbling run in the floor exercise, Fujimoto broke his kneecap. Knowing that his team could not afford to lose points and aware of the Olympic rules that prohibited the use of painkillers, Fujimoto chose to continue performing with the pain.“I did not want to worry my teammates,” Fujimoto recalled later. “The competition was so close I didn’t want them to lose their concentration with worry about me.”With his teammates and coaches unaware of the injury, Fujimoto scored a 9.5 out of a possible 10 on the pommel horse. The following event, the rings, would prove a greater test of Fujimoto’s fortitude—it required a high-flying dismount. But Fujimoto, age 26, gave the performance of his life. He launched a triple somersault dismount and landed with great force on his injured right leg. Despite intense pain throughout the leg, Fujimoto kept his balance and held his position. He then lurched painfully to the sidelines and collapsed into the arms of the Japanese coach. The judges awarded him a 9.7, his highest recorded score on the rings.Doctors examined Fujimoto and determined the extent of his injury. The dismount had further dislocated his kneecap in addition to tearing ligaments. Fujimoto was determined to continue, but Japanese officials and his teammates would not allow it.Fujimoto’s courage inspired his five remaining teammates to perform impeccably through the final events. After a near-flawless performance on the horizontal bar by Tsukahara Mitsuo, the Japanese won the gold medal for the fifth consecutive time. Japan’s gold medal finish, by 0.4 point over the Soviets, is the narrowest margin of victory in team gymnastics in Olympic history.How much do the hopes of a nation weigh? Typically, political leaders are the only ones who can answer that question, but in Indonesia badminton legend Susi Susanti may also have an answer. The 1992 Games in Barcelona, Spain, marked the debut of badminton as an Olympic sport, and Susanti was the favorite in the women’s competition. To understand the pressure she was under, one must understand what badminton means to her homeland.Badminton is not just the national sport of Indonesia, it’s the national obsession. The game, which most likely originated in India, was popularized at Badminton, a country estate in England, and was introduced to Indonesia by Dutch colonists. Since the 1940s the game, known as bulutangkis, has dominated the national sporting scene, and Indonesian players have been world-renowned for their prowess. Every neighborhood in the densely populated nation has found room for at least one well-used badminton court. In the village of Klaten, the locals still play matches in a bamboo hall.Like most kids in Indonesia, Susanti grew up playing the game; unlike most, however, she never seemed to lose. She had already won almost every major badminton title in the world, and she was expected to bring home Indonesia’s first gold medal in Barcelona. She did not disappoint, defeating Bang Soo Hyun of South Korea in the championship match of the women’s singles event. Adding to the excitement was the fact that her fiancé, Alan Budi Kusuma, took the gold medal in the badminton men’s singles. In recognition of her Olympic victory, Susanti was greeted on her return to Indonesia with one of the biggest parades the country has ever seen. The proud and appreciative nation also rewarded its young, ponytailed heroine with $200,000 and a house.At the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, Susanti earned a bronze medal in the singles competition. Susanti and Kusuma, who met at a badminton training camp in 1985, finally married in 1997. They had a baby girl in April 1999, and a few months later the new parents both resigned from the national badminton team—Susanti as a player and Kusuma as a coach.Standing just 4 feet 11 inches (1.5 metres) tall and weighing less than 141 pounds (64 kg), Naim Suleymanoglu is hardly imposing enough to stir thoughts of Hercules. Yet that is the Turkish weight lifter’s nickname—“Pocket Hercules,” to be exact—and he backed up the moniker no better than at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta, Georgia, in a head-to-head duel with Greece’s Valerios Leonidis.The two rivals dominated the competition, pushing each other further and further. Before they would finish, three new world records would be set, and, for the third time in as many Olympiads, Suleymanoglu would stand atop the podium.The Bulgarian-born Suleymanoglu, who set his first world record at age 15, attracted crowds of Turkish fans to the match. He began his career competing for Bulgaria, but he defected in 1986, citing the harsh treatment of the country’s Turkish minority. Turkey paid Bulgaria $1 million to waive the rule barring athletes from competing for three years after changing nationality so that he would become eligible for the 1988 Games in Seoul, South Korea. Eight years later, Suleymanoglu had become a hero of mythic proportions in his adopted homeland.With Suleymanoglu’s fans on one side and Greeks on the other, the intense match began. In the snatch, part one of the two-part competition, Suleymanoglu failed to lift 325 pounds (147.5 kg) in either of his first two lifts. In order to stay in the competition, the weight would become a necessity in his third and final lift. The chiseled Suleymanoglu let the timer tick away until the final seconds, then squatted to lift the bar. As the weight passed his face, Suleymanoglu allowed himself a small grin—Pocket Hercules could feel his success.In the second part of the competition, the clean and jerk, Suleymanoglu began by lifting 396.25 pounds (179.6 kg). Leonidis matched him with ease, and so Suleymanoglu increased the weight to 407.75 pounds, breaking the world record by 4.5 pounds. Leonidis wouldn’t quit, besting Suleymanoglu as he hoisted 413.25 pounds—a world record of his own.Pocket Hercules was unfazed. With the now-buzzing crowd anxiously anticipating his next move, Suleymanoglu used his third and last lift to shove 413.5 pounds above his head in two forceful motions. Combined with his lift in the snatch, the weight in the clean set yet another world mark, this one for overall weight, and gave Suleymanoglu the overall lead.It was now back to Leonidis, who needed 418.75 pounds in his final lift to take the gold. The bar didn’t even reach his waist. Pandemonium struck as Suleymanoglu again won gold. He became the first weight lifter to win three consecutive gold medals, adding to the legend of Turkey’s most celebrated athlete.The creation of the Ekecheiria, the Olympic truce, lies within the traditional story of the founding of the ancient Olympic Games. Two warring kings of the area around Olympia, Iphitos and Cleomenes, joined with the Spartan lawgiver Lycurgus in an agreement to hold the Games and to enact and publicize an Olympic truce. Before every Olympiad, then, heralds from Olympia moved around Greece inviting participants and spectators and announcing the truce. Contrary to what many have thought, especially some modern Olympic officials, the Greeks did not cease their wars against one another during the Games or the Olympic truce. Rather, the truce, besides protecting Olympia from invasion, forbade any individual or government to interfere with anyone traveling to and from the Olympics. There is only one known case of the truce being invoked, and the complaint came from Athens, not Olympia.Because each Greek city was a separate political state, the ancient Games were international. The Greeks themselves saw that the Olympics had special potential for the promotion of peace among their often warring city-states. This potential was especially important to Pierre, baron de Coubertin, and his predecessors in the modern Olympic revival who believed strongly that the Games were capable of advancing international understanding and the cause of world peace. The Olympics have played that role with marked success, especially among athletes and spectators, if not governments.Emphasis on a kind of Olympic peace has become a major feature of modern Olympic ideology. In the year 2000, Olympic officials established the International Olympic Truce Foundation to encourage the study of world peace and the creation of progress in its pursuit. The foundation is headquartered in Athens and has endeavoured to institute an official Olympic truce that would, unlike the ancient version, persuade countries not to wage war during the Olympic Games.In addition to the social practices that contribute actively to a nation’s image, national cultures are characterized by competing discourses through which people construct meanings that influence their self-conception and behaviour. These discourses often take the form of stories that are told about the nation in history books, novels, plays, poems, the mass media, and popular culture. Memories of shared experiences—not only triumphs but also sorrows and disasters—are recounted in compelling ways that connect a nation’s present with its past. The construction of a national identity in large part involves reference to an imagined community based on a range of characteristics thought to be shared by and specific to a set of people. Stories and memories held in common contribute to the description of those characteristics and give meaning to the notion of nation and national identity. Presented in this way, nationalism can be used to legitimize, or justify, the existence and activities of modern territorial states.Sports, which offer influential representations of individuals and communities, are especially well placed to contribute to this process of identity formation and to the invention of traditions. Sports are inherently dramatic (from Greek dran, “to act, do, perform”). They are physical contests whose meanings can be “read” and understood by everyone. Ordinary citizens who are indifferent to national literary classics can become emotionally engaged in the discourses promoted in and through sports. Sometimes the nationhood of countries is viewed as indivisible from the fortunes of the national teams of specific sports. Uruguay, which hosted and won the first World Cup football championship in 1930, and Wales, where rugby union is closely woven with religion and community to reflect Welsh values, are prime examples. In both cases national identity has been closely tied to the fortunes of male athletes engaged in the “national sport.” England’s eclipse as a cricket power is often thought, illogically, to be symptomatic of a wider social malaise. These examples highlight the fact that a sport can be used to support, or undermine, a sense of national identity. Clifford Geertz’s classic study of Balinese cockfighting, Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight (1972), illustrates another case in point. Although Balinese culture is based on the avoidance of conflict, men’s identification with their birds allows for the vicarious expression of hostility.By the beginning of the final decades of the 19th century, sports had become a form of “patriot games” in which particular views of national identity were constructed. Both established and outsider groups used and continue to use sports to represent, maintain, and challenge identities. In this way sports can either support or undermine hegemonic social relations. The interweaving of sports and national identity politics can be illustrated with several telling examples.In 1896 a team of Japanese schoolboys soundly defeated a team of Americans from the Yokohama Athletic Club in a series of highly publicized baseball games. Their victories, “beating them at their own game,” were seen as a national triumph and as a repudiation of the American stereotype of the Japanese as myopic weaklings.Similarly, the “bodyline” controversy of the 1932–33 cricket Test series between Australia and England exemplifies the convergence of sports and politics. At issue were the violent tactics employed by the English bowlers, who deliberately threw at the bodies of the Australian batsmen in order to injure or intimidate them. The bowlers’ “unsporting” behaviour raised questions about fair play, good sportsmanship, and national honour. It also jeopardized Australia’s political relationship with Great Britain. So great was the resulting controversy that the Australian and British governments became involved. Arguably, one consequence was the forging of a more independent attitude in Australians’ dealings with the British in the political, economic, and cultural realms.The Soviet Union’s military suppression of reformist efforts to create “socialism with a human face” in Hungary (1956) and in Czechoslovakia (1968) were followed by famous symbolic reenactments of the conflicts in the form of an Olympic water-polo match (U.S.S.R. versus Hungary) and an ice hockey encounter (U.S.S.R. versus Czechoslovakia). In both cases, sports were invested with tremendous political significance, and the Soviet team’s defeat was seen as a vindication of national identity.(For more on the relationship of sports to national character and national traditions and myths, see Britannica’s article sports, from which the foregoing was excerpted.)The globalization of sports is part of a much larger—and much more controversial—globalization process. Examined historically and analytically, this larger globalization process can be understood as the development of a worldwide network of interdependencies. The 20th century witnessed the advent of a global economy, a transnational cosmopolitan culture, and a variety of international social movements. As a result of modern technology, people, money, images, and ideas are able to traverse the globe with tremendous speed. The development of modern sports was influenced by the interwoven economic, political, social, and cultural patterns of globalization. These patterns both enable and constrain people’s actions, which means that there are winners and losers in the diffusion of modern sports from Europe and North America to the rest of the world.The emergence and diffusion of modern sports in the 19th and 20th centuries are clearly part of the larger process of globalization. The globalization of sports has been characterized by the creation of national and international sports organizations, the standardization and worldwide acceptance of the rules and regulations for individual and team sports, the development of regularly scheduled international competitions, and the establishment of special competitions, such as the Olympic Games and the various world championships, that aspire to involve athletes from nations in all corners of the globe.The emergence and diffusion of modern sports is bound up in complex networks and interdependency chains that are marked by unequal power relations. The world can be understood as an interdependent whole, where groups constantly compete for dominant (or less-subordinate) positions. In sports as in other social realms, Europe and North America have been hegemonic. Modern sports are to an overwhelming degree Western sports. As modern sports spread throughout the world, the myriad traditional sports of Asia, Africa, and South America were marginalized. Sports such as Japanese kemari and Afghan buzkashi survive as folkloric curiosities.No master plan has governed the process of sports globalization. Throughout the period of Western imperialism that reached its apogee in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, colonized peoples were often forced to adopt Western sports. (This was especially true at missionary schools.) More often than not, however, politically and economically colonized peoples were motivated by emulation. Anglophile Argentines formed football teams not because they were coerced to play but rather because football was the game played by the English whom they admired. More recently, however, as transnational corporations have sought to sell every kind of product to every reachable consumer, modern sports have been systematically marketed to the entire world, not only as sources of pleasure but also as signs of distinction, prestige, and power.Western values and capitalist marketing, advertising, and consumption have influenced the ways people throughout the world construct, use, represent, imagine, and feel about their bodies. Unquestionably, there is a political economy at work in the production and consumption of global sports and leisure products that has resulted in the relative ascendancy of a narrow selection of Western sports, but non-Western sports and attitudes toward the physical self have not completely disappeared. Not only have they survived, but some of them, such as the martial arts and yoga, have also found a prominent place in the sports and body cultures of Europe and North America.It is possible, therefore, to overstate the extent to which the West has dominated in terms of global sports structures, organizations, and ideologies. As noted, non-Western cultures resist and reinterpret Western sports and maintain, foster, and promote on a global scale their own indigenous recreational pursuits. The popularity of Asian martial arts in Europe and the Americas is one sign of this. In other words, global sports processes involve multidirectional movements of people, practices, customs, and ideas that reflect a series of shifting power balances. These processes have unintended as well as intended consequences. While the intentional actions of transnational agencies or corporations such as the International Olympic Committee (IOC) or Nike, Inc., are probably more significant in the short term, over the longer term the unintentional, relatively autonomous transnational practices predominate. The 19th-century diffusion of football (soccer) is one example of this sort of globalization. The 20th-century diffusion of surfboarding from Hawaii is another.In sum, the speed, scale, and volume of sports development can be imagined as eddies within the broader global flows of people, technology, finance, images, and ideologies that are dominated by Europe and North America (whose elites are predominantly white males). There are, however, signs that global processes may be leading to the diminution of Western power in a variety of contexts, including sports. Sports may become increasingly contested, with Asian and African cultures challenging 19th- and 20th-century hegemonic masculine notions regarding the content, meaning, control, organization, and ideology of sports. Moreover, global flows are simultaneously increasing the varieties of body cultures and identities available to people in local cultures. Global sports, then, seem to be leading not only to the reduction in contrasts between societies but also to the simultaneous emergence of new varieties of body cultures and identities.(For more on the social and cultural aspects of sports, see Britannica’s article sports, from which the foregoing was excerpted.)That international sports success in the late 20th century involved a contest between systems located within a global context was vividly displayed in the sporting struggles of the Cold War era. From the 1950s to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in the 1990s, there was intense athletic rivalry between the Soviet bloc on the one hand and the United States and its allies on the other. On both sides of the Iron Curtain, sports victories were touted as proof of ideological superiority. A partial list of the most memorable Soviet-Western showdowns might include the Soviet Union’s disputed victory over the U.S. basketball team in the final seconds of the gold medal game of the 1972 Summer Olympics; Canada’s last-minute goal against the Soviet Union in the concluding game of their 1972 eight-game ice hockey series; the defeat of the veteran Soviet ice hockey team by a much younger American squad at the 1980 Winter Olympics; and a number of track-and-field showdowns between East and West Germany.Success in these encounters depended on several factors, among them the identification and recruitment of human resources (including coaches and trainers as well as athletes), innovations in coaching and training, advances in sports medicine and sports psychology, and—not surprisingly—the expenditure of a significant portion of the gross domestic product to support these systems. While neglecting the infrastructure for recreational sports for ordinary citizens, the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) sought to enhance their international prestige by investing huge sums in elite sports. At universities and sports centres in Moscow, Leipzig, Bucharest, and elsewhere, Soviet-bloc countries developed an elaborate sports-medicine and sports-science program (allied in the case of East Germany with a state-sponsored drug regime). For a time, the Soviet-bloc countries were outcompeting their Western counterparts, but the major Western sporting nations began to create similar state-sponsored programs. Poorer nations, with the notable exception of Fidel Castro’s Cuba, were for the most part unable or unwilling to dedicate scarce economic resources to the athletic “arms race.” As a result, they had difficulty competing on the world stage.Even after the dissolution of the Soviet bloc, an international order persists in which nations can be grouped into core, semiperipheral, and peripheral blocs, not by geography but rather by politics, economics, and culture. The core of the sports world comprises the United States, Russia, western Europe, Australia, New Zealand, and Canada. Japan, South Korea, China, Cuba, Brazil, and several of the former Soviet-bloc states can be classified as semiperipheral sports powers. On the periphery are most Asian, African, and Latin American nations. The core may be challenged on the field of play in one sport or another (East African runners dominate middle-distance races), but control over the ideological and economic resources associated with sports still tends to lie in the West, where the IOC and the headquarters of nearly all the international sports federations are located. Despite their relative weakness in international competition, noncore countries have used regularly recurring sports festivals, such as the Asian Games, to solidify regional and national identities and to enhance international recognition and prestige.Despite programs such as Olympic Solidarity, which provides aid and technical assistance to poorer nations, material resources still tend to be concentrated in the core nations, while those on the periphery lack the means to develop and retain their athletic talent. They lose many of their best athletes to more powerful nations that can offer better training facilities, stiffer competition, and greater financial rewards. The more commercialized the sport, the greater the “brawn drain.” At the turn of the 21st century, Western nations recruited not only sports scientists and coaches from the former Soviet bloc but also athletic talent from Africa and South America. This was especially true in sports such as football, where players were lured by the lucrative contracts offered by European and Japanese clubs. Noncore leagues remain in a dependent relationship with the dominant European core. In other sports, such as track and field and baseball, this drain of talent flows to the United States. Despite some competition from Japan, the West also remains overwhelmingly dominant in terms of the design, production, and marketing of sportswear and equipment.(For more on the social and cultural aspects of sports, see Britannica’s article sports, from which the foregoing was excerpted.)The Olympic Games’ return to Athens in 2004 came with great fanfare. The Games have expanded from 241 to 10,500 competitors since their original reestablishment in Athens with the 1896 Games. Dozens of additions and changes have been made in the Olympic program since 1896, with almost 100 events being added since 1980 alone. Although enthusiasts of many activities hope to see their avocations become Olympic sports, only a few receive one of the coveted slots in the Olympic program.The first step in the process of becoming an Olympic sport is recognition as a sport from the International Olympic Committee (IOC). The IOC requires that the activity have administration by an international non-governmental organization that oversees at least one sport. Once a sport is recognized, it then moves to International Sports Federation (IF) status. At that point, the international organization administering the sport must enforce the Olympic Movement Anti-Doping Code, including conducting effective out-of-competition tests on the sport’s competitors, while maintaining rules set forth by the Olympic Charter.A sport may gain IOC recognition but not become a competing event at the Olympic Games. Bowling, rugby, and chess are recognized sports, but they do not compete at the Games. To become a part of the Games the sport’s IF must apply for admittance by filing a petition establishing its criteria of eligibility to the IOC. The IOC may then admit an activity into the Olympic program in one of three different ways: as a sport, a discipline, which is a branch of a sport, or an event, which is a competition within a discipline. For instance, triathlon was admitted as a sport, debuting at the 2000 Games in Sydney. Women’s wrestling was a new discipline in the sport of wrestling at the Athens Games, and women’s pole vaulting was the most recently added track and field event. Rules for admittance vary slightly between a new sport, a discipline, and an event, but the intent is the same.Once an IF has presented its petition, many rules and regulations control whether the sport will become part of the Olympic Games. The Olympic Charter indicates that to be accepted, a sport must be widely practiced by men in at least 75 countries and on four continents, and by women in no fewer than 40 countries and on three continents. The sport must also increase the ‘‘value and appeal’’ of the Olympic Games and retain and reflect its modern traditions. There are numerous other rules, including bans on purely ‘‘mind sports’’ and sports dependent on mechanical propulsion. These rules have kept chess, automobile racing, and other recognized sports out of the Olympic Games.In recent years the IOC has worked to manage the scope of the Olympics by permitting new sports only in conjunction with the simultaneous discontinuation of others. Sports that have already been part of the Games are periodically reviewed to determine whether they should be retained. The Olympic Program Commission notes that problems have arisen when trying to find venues to accommodate some sports’ specific needs, such as baseball and softball, which will be discontinued from Olympic programming starting with the London Games in 2012. When choosing sports to include in the program the IOC must take into consideration media and public interest, since these are a key drive behind the Olympic Games, but must simultaneously manage costs.While a number of events have been added to the Games since their resumption in 1896, a good number have been sidelined. Tug-of-war, for example, was once a respected Olympic sport. Cricket, golf, lacrosse, polo, power boating, rackets, rink-hockey, roque, rugby, and water skiing were all once part of the Olympic Games but have been discontinued over the years.Encyclopædia Britannica Almanac, 2006The seventh World Games, held in Duisburg, Ger., July 14–24, 2005, was an international event that drew some 500,000 spectators and featured a diverse palette of more than 30 sports in six categories: artistry and dance sports, precision sports, trend sports, martial arts, ball sports, and strength sports. The individual events contested ranged from bodybuilding and mountaineering to bowling and waterskiing. Russia and Germany tied in the overall medal count with 57 medals each, though Russia won more gold (27).Held every four years in the year following the Summer Olympic Games—and with the support of the International Olympic Committee (IOC)—the World Games were created in 1981 to help celebrate the Olympic movement while allowing non-Olympic sports to have their own elite international competition. Some events, such as triathlon and beach volleyball, were later accepted into the Olympics, while others, such as rugby and tug-of-war, were former Olympic sports.In order for a sport to be included in the Olympic program, it must be voted into the program seven years prior to the Games in which it would appear. To be eligible, a sport needs to be under the control of an IOC-recognized international sports federation (IF) that is responsible for the integrity of the sport on the international level. The IFs can petition the IOC to become official Olympic sports. They are evaluated on the following principles: history of the sport, worldwide reach, popularity, image, athletes’ health and welfare, development of the IF, and venue costs. Each sport in the Games is later reevaluated to make sure that it appeals to Olympic fans.Four sports contested in the 2005 World Games—karate, roller sports, rugby, and squash—vied to be added to the program for the 2012 Olympics in London. IOC members cast their ballots during the 117th IOC Session, held in July in Singapore. Since the IOC eliminated baseball and softball from the 2012 Games, supporters of the five candidate sports (the four World Games sports and golf) were optimistic. Only squash and karate advanced past the initial vote, gaining the 50 percent of the preliminary votes needed to be considered, but on the second vote neither sport gained the necessary two-thirds majority to be included in the 2012 Games. After the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, each sport would have the opportunity to come up again for an IOC vote into the Olympic program.Britannica Book of the Year, 2006The first major sports competition for athletes with disabilities was organized by Sir Ludwig Guttmann for British World War II veterans with spinal cord injuries and was held in England in 1948. A follow-up competition took place in 1952, with athletes from The Netherlands joining the British competitors. In 1960 the first quadrennial Olympic-style Games for disabled athletes were held in Rome; the quadrennial Winter Games were added in 1976, in Sweden. Since the 1988 Olympic Games, held in Seoul (and the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville, France), the Paralympics have been held at the Olympic venues and have used the same facilities. In 2001 the International Olympic Committee and the International Paralympic Committee (founded in 1989) agreed on the practice of “one bid, one city,” in which every city that bids to host the Olympics also bids to hold the related Paralympics. In 2008 the Beijing Paralympics were scheduled for September 6–17, following the Summer Games of August 8–24.The size and diversity of the Paralympic Games have increased greatly over the years. At the 2004 Paralympics in Athens, more than 3,800 athletes representing 136 National Olympic Committees (NOCs) participated in 19 sports: archery, athletics (track and field), boccia, cycling, equestrian, association football (both 7-a-side and 5-a-side), goalball, judo, powerlifting, sailing, shooting, swimming, table tennis, and volleyball (sitting), as well as wheelchair competition in basketball, fencing, rugby, and tennis. China captured the most medals, with a total of 141 (63 gold). The 2008 Beijing Paralympics, which anticipated competitors from some 150 NOCs, added rowing to the schedule. At the 2006 Turin (Italy) Winter Paralympics, more than 470 athletes representing 39 NOCs competed in five sports: Alpine and cross-country skiing, ice sledge hockey, biathlon, and wheelchair curling.Paralympic athletes compete in six different disability groups—amputee, cerebral palsy, visual impairment, spinal cord injuries, intellectual disability, and “les autres” (athletes whose disability does not fit into one of the other categories, including dwarfism). Within each group, athletes are further divided into classes on the basis of the type and extent of their disabilities, though individual athletes may be reclassified at later competitions if their physical status changes.